
At this point, just sit down and start pounding out the real first draft of
the novel. You will be astounded at how fast the story flies out of your
fingers at this stage. I have seen writers triple their writing speed
overnight, while producing better quality first drafts than they usually
produce on a third draft.

You might think that all the creativity is chewed out of the story by this
time. Well, no, not unless you overdid your analysis when you wrote your
Snowflake. This is supposed to be the fun part, because there are many
small-scale logic problems to work out here. How does Hero get out of that
tree surrounded by alligators and rescue Heroine who's in the burning rowboat?
This is the time to figure it out! But it's fun because you already know that
the large-scale structure of the novel works. So you only have to solve a
limited set of problems, and so you can write relatively fast.

This stage is incredibly fun and exciting. I have heard many writers complain
about how hard the first draft is. Invariably, they are seat-of-the-pants
writers who have no clue what's coming next. Good grief! Life is too short to
write like that! There is no reason to spend 500 hours writing a wandering
first draft of your novel when you can write a solid one in 150. Counting the
100 hours it takes to do the design documents, you come out way ahead in time.

(I'll note that many seat-of-the-pants writers shriek at the thought of doing
a Snowflake document. That's fine. Different people are different. I suspect
you know already whether the Snowflake is something that's going to work for
you or not. Even if it does work for you, I'd encourage you to improvise on
it. May a thousand different Snowflake methods bloom!) There is not just one
solution to the problem of how to write a novel, there are many. Use the one
that works for you.

About midway through a first draft, I usually take a breather and fix all the
broken parts of my design documents. Yes, the design documents are not
perfect! That's okay! The design documents are not fixed in concrete, they are
a living set of documents that grows as you develop your novel. If you are
doing your job right, at the end of the first draft you will laugh at what an
amateurish piece of junk your design documents were. And you'll be thrilled at
how deep your story has become.

That's All! That's the Snowflake Method. It works for me and for many of my
writer friends who have tried it. I've lost track of how many people around
the world who have emailed me to say that the Snowflake helped them get their
novel on track. So it works for a lot of people. I hope it works for you.

